Add Transactions doc (#24)
spacemeshos/protocol: transactions/01-overview.md

In Spacemesh, a transaction is an order to transfer funds from one account to another. The transaction specifies the amount to be transferred, the sender's wallet address, the recipient's wallet address, and the fee to be paid to the miner that mines the transaction. The transaction is signed using the private key of the sender, which is how the protocol knows that the transaction is legitimate (i.e., that it originated with the holder of the sender's private key).

## Account model

Spacemesh uses the account model for storing value. This means that users are encouraged to reuse accounts for multiple transactions, similar to a bank account, rather than generate a new address for every transaction (as in the UTXO model). When multiple transactions increase the balance of an account, the funds from different transactions become fungible and indistinguishable from one another.

An account in Spacemesh is a mapping from a wallet address to a balance of Smesh tokens. Note that there is not a one-to-one mapping between _users_ and _addresses,_ as one user may control many addresses (or, less often but also possibly, one address could be controlled by many users).

> Even though a transaction is signed, so that the protocol can verify that it came from the sender, without additional protections, transactions are still susceptible to a [replay attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replay_attack): if Alice sends funds to Bob, Bob could resend the same transaction (that Alice already signed) to the network to steal additional funds from Alice. In order to prevent replay attacks, each account also stores a transaction counter, also known as a "nonce." Each transaction must declare a nonce, and a transaction is only valid if it has a nonce that matches the current value of the account counter.

Author: This is what Ethereum calls it. Even if the terminology is not strictly accurate, I think it's a useful anchor for developers who are used to other systems. I'll move it into parenthesis to make it clear that it's not the right term in Spacemesh-land.

### Address format and signature scheme

Spacemesh uses the standard `curve25519` to generate keypairs. A private key is 32 bytes of random data, and the public key is derived from the private key. The Spacemesh address is the 20-byte suffix of the public key. In other words, the wallet address may be expressed as:

`address = Bytes[12..31](public_key)`

## Transaction structure

The actual transaction data structure in Spacemesh contains the following:

- Recipient's address (20 bytes)
- Amount to transfer (8 bytes)
- Amount of the fee to be paid (to the miner) (8 bytes)
- Nonce (8 bytes)

> - Signature (32 bytes)

Author: You mean the signature should be 64 bytes?

> - Signature (32 bytes)

Reviewer: Yes. @noamnelke can you please confirm?

> - Signature (32 bytes)

Reviewer 2: Yes, TX sigs are 64 bytes.

> Spacemesh uses the standard `curve25519` to generate keypairs. A private key is 32 bytes of random data. The public key is derived from the private key using ED25519 [public key extraction](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/42437/how-to-generate-ed25519-public-key-from-private-key-using-libsodium) (note that Ethereum [does something similar](https://medium.com/@piyopiyo/how-to-get-senders-ethereum-address-and-public-key-from-signed-transaction-44abe17a1791)). The Spacemesh address is the 20-byte suffix of the public key. In other words, the wallet address may be expressed as:

Reviewer: For the first part, I'd write "A private key is 32 bytes of random data, and the public key is derived from it (as in a standard ECDLP-based system)."
It is not correct to mention ed25519 (which is a signature scheme) here or public key extraction (which applies to sig. schemes). The second link is also irrelevant.
*ECDLP = elliptic curve discrete log(arithm) problem

Author: Mentioning the "ECDLP-based system" doesn't help me understand this better as a developer (the intended audience of these docs), so I'm leaving this part out. Otherwise, this has been cleaned up.

> `address = Bytes[0..19](ECDSAPUBKEY(private_key))`

Reviewer 2: Per @barakshani's correction, this should be:
```suggestion
`address = Bytes[12..31](ECDSAPUBKEY(private_key))`
```

> `address = Bytes[12..31](ECDSAPUBKEY(private_key))`

Reviewer: why ECDSA?

The transaction is signed using the private key corresponding to the sender's account. Note that the sender's address is not _explicitly_ included in the transaction. This is because it can be _implicitly derived_ from this signature (using [public key extraction](https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/18105/how-does-recovering-the-public-key-from-an-ecdsa-signature-work/18106) applied to ed25519).

The total size of a transaction is 76 bytes.

### Syntactic validity

> Technically, any message that is 76 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't _contextually valid_, and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).

Author: Which part are you taking issue with? "Contextually valid" transaction? I'm not sure if I got this from somewhere else or made it up myself. It's definitely different than how the term is used in the context of blocks but it sounds okay to me.

> Technically, any message that is 76 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't _contextually valid_, and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).

Reviewer: Yes: transaction contextual validity. Thing is that a transaction may not be (contextually) valid at some point, but then become valid at other point. Maybe I'm just not used to the terminology.

> Technically, any message that is 76 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't _contextually valid_, and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).

Author: > a transaction may not be (contextually) valid at some point, but then become valid at other point

That's sort of the definition of contextual validity, isn't it?

I think it's okay if we use the term in this context, as long as we explicitly define it (which we do, just below).

Another option, I suppose, is that we could say a transaction is "correctly formatted" (what I'm calling "syntactically valid") vs. just "valid" ("contextually valid").

> Technically, any message that is 76 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't _contextually valid_, and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).

Reviewer 2: I agree that the use of "contextual validity" here is slightly different than other places. I think the terminology still makes sense, but I'm ok with either leaving it or changing it, e.g. to what @lrettig is suggesting.

<a name="ordering"></a>
### Transaction ordering

Transaction order in Spacemesh is defined in the following way:

1. Blocks in layer _n_ come before those in layer _n+1_
1. The IDs of all [contextually valid](../consensus/01-overview.md#validity) blocks in layer _n_ are listed in ascending order
1. These block IDs are concatenated and hashed
1. The hash sum is used as the seed for a [Mersenne Twister](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mersenne_Twister) (a type of pseudorandom number generator)
1. A [Fisher-Yates shuffle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher%E2%80%93Yates_shuffle) is performed on the list of block IDs using the output of the Mersenne Twister
1. Transactions from the ordered blocks are then applied, in the order they appear in each block, ignoring duplicates (only the first appearance of a transaction determines its ordering)

### Contextual validity

A transaction is deemed contextually valid, and is applied to the global state, if the following conditions apply:

1. The origin account (derived from the signature) exists
1. The nonce on the account matches the transaction nonce
1. The account balance is greater than or equal to the transaction amount + fee

> 

Author: Not sure what you mean, more specific criticism would be helpful!

> 

Reviewer: I think that I am mostly missing some high level context and a bit more organised flow.
I would write that txs are propagated among nodes, and should be placed into blocks in order to be applied into the global state (yes, it should be clear, but I don't think it hurts to present the high level context). Then there are 2 "filters", one is whether the tx "makes sense": account has money, nonce is correct etc. It is clear that such txs should not appear in blocks, because it is a waste of the block space. Another "filter" is applied to the txs that passed the first: this is what you call contextual validity -- the main point here is that we want the ledger the be consistent.

Regarding the validity terminology, if all transactions are _syntactically_ valid then there's no point in having this definition. _Contextual_ validity is presented as something that is relevant only before applying txs to the state. While it is sufficient in principal, in fact we do contextual validity checks also before putting txs into blocks (e.g. tx counter, account has funds).

> 

Author: > Then there are 2 "filters", one is whether the tx "makes sense": account has money, nonce is correct etc. It is clear that such txs should not appear in blocks, because it is a waste of the block space. Another "filter" is applied to the txs that passed the first: this is what you call contextual validity -- the main point here is that we want the ledger the be consistent.

Actually, I'm not sure what you mean by "two filters." What you describe, whether the tx "makes sense" - i.e., the list in this document that I called "Contextual validity" - is the only filter. What's the second filter?

> 

Author: > Contextual validity is presented as something that is relevant only before applying txs to the state. While it is sufficient in principal, in fact we do contextual validity checks also before putting txs into blocks (e.g. tx counter, account has funds).

We definitely do contextual validity checks before putting txs into blocks. However, what happens if our node sees a block that contains a contextually invalid block? Obviously, the entire block is invalid - but what validity condition did it violate?

> 

Reviewer: As I wrote at the very end, it seemed to me that you determine whether a transaction is contextually valid or not only at the "very end", before we apply it into the state.
If this is the case, how do you call a transaction that you just received via gossip, but the sender's account does not exist?
If this is not the case, then you can probably ignore the following paragraph. However, it would be good to clarify the language, so it would be clear it is not the case.

The two filters I described are:
1. Should I put the transaction into a block? (it seems to be ok = "makes sense")
2. Should I apply it into the state? (maybe some other transaction, that's already been applied to the state just now, has conflicts with this one = the ledger would be inconsistent if we apply this transaction, even though it is already in a contextually valid block)

> 

Reviewer: The block is fine. We just don't apply the transaction into the state.

> 

Author: I'm confused about these "two filters." The way it's currently written (under [Global state](https://github.com/spacemeshos/protocol/blob/d34664dd35c6f8e51223f2bf0b315d3bbcb6bc61/transactions/01-overview.md#global-state)] is: "The transactions in a given layer are applied to global state, in order, when that layer is finalized" - that should be the _second_ filter. There is no information in this document now on the _first_ filter, i.e., the way tx are assembled into a block in the first place, and that may be the source of confusion.

It seems to me that the `O(n^2)` algorithm described under "Global state" is the one that should be used _when a block is first assembled,_ i.e., to answer your question:

> how do you call a transaction that you just received via gossip, but the sender's account does not exist?

You check its contextual validity. If it's contextually invalid right now, as it would be if the sender's account does not exist (or the tx counter is too high, etc.), then you put it into the mempool and leave it there, for now - and you probably do not (yet) gossip it to other nodes. As you continue to receive new tx via gossip, you periodically check whether these "contextually invalid" tx in the mempool have become valid, in light of new information, and when you find newly-contextually-valid tx, you include them in a block (likely alongside the tx that "made them valid").

Maybe @noamnelke could weigh in and help clear up the confusion here.

> 

Reviewer: First paragraph: you are correct. Technically, I think that you choose from the mempool arbitrarily, so the first "filter" is applied on what to include in the mempool.

For the answer to my question, great -- I see now the source for my confusion: basically you say (though it is not written) that we have 3 states: (contextually) invalid, undetermined / pending, and valid transaction. The latter is determined once we applied a tx into the global state. I was unsatisfied because I thought that the first two are called invalid.

I think that the node's API actually have different names for it: we do have pending, and I think that valid is called "approved".

> 

Author: I agree that "valid" is determined once a tx is applied to global state. I also agree on "undetermined/pending." I don't think, however, that we've given a compelling answer to how to determine that a tx is "contextually invalid." In fact, strictly speaking, I don't think you can _ever_ determine this, since there may _always_ be some outstanding tx (that you've never seen) that makes it valid. In _practice_ I think what should happen here is that the tx waits in the mempool for some period of time, and then may eventually just get dropped from the mempool - if, e.g., the mempool fills up.

One more important point: I'm describing "platonic" desirable behavior, _not_ behavior as implemented in go-spacemesh. I'm not sure how things are implemented today. Noam or someone else could probably explain that better.

> 

Reviewer: Now you got me confused again : )
I commented previously - when I explained my inconvenience about "tx contextual validity" - that some transaction may be invalid at some point, then turned valid at another. You said that it is fine, but now it seems that you say it isn't.

> 

Author: My argument is that a tx is never "contextually invalid." It's either contextually valid, or "we don't know yet." It can move from the latter to the former. (And, in practice, if a tx remains "we don't know yet" for a long enough time, then it should be safe to discard it.) Does that make sense?

> 

Reviewer: yes, i understood this argument. if we allow _pending_ to be dynamic, then we can probably allow (currently) _invalid_ to be dynamic (that is, may change later).
But note that this is really a terminology discussion. We are in agreement about the content.
BTW, I think that invalid is called "rejected" by the API.

> 

Reviewer 2: Let me try to clarify a bit.

There is only one time when it's critical to decide in a deterministic way if a transaction is valid or not - that is when it's (potentially) applied to the global state.

A block may reference transactions that end up not being valid when they are evaluated, even if the miner is honest, because a different block may include a conflicting transaction that was applied sooner.

This is why we don't punish miners for including invalid transactions. In blockchains this could invalidate a whole block, but our miners have no control over what ends up going into the global state before them.

When miners decide what goes into the block they employ a heuristic. They have an interest to not waste block space on transactions that won't pay a fee. The way this heuristic is implemented is by actually not accepting into the mempool transactions that aren't highly likely to end up being valid. This also minimizes another unrelated problem - that we have no mempool eviction mechanism other than transactions being applied or superseded by another transaction with the same nonce.

There are 3 broad states a transaction can be in:
1. Pending (which includes temporarily invalid, e.g. due to insufficient balance, or too high nonce)
2. Applied
3. Rejected (due to too another transaction with same nonce having been applied)

The current implementation is especially strict and won't accept a TX into the mempool even if it's "pending", but we don't know of a set of transactions that would make it be applicable right now.

Hope this helps.

> 

Author: Thanks @noamnelke that makes things much clearer. Just to clarify one thing:

> The current implementation is especially strict and won't accept a TX into the mempool even if it's "pending", but we don't know of a set of transactions that would make it be applicable right now.

What if a node receives a tx with a nonce that's, say, one notch too high. Does being "strict" mean that it would immediately discard this tx, rather than waiting for the missing tx that might make it valid?

> 

Reviewer 2: Yes, you got it right. I said it was strict 😉

The thing is that incoming transactions are processed serially and there's no reason (unless an adversarial node is involved) that transactions won't arrive in the order they were transmitted.

Since we're currently not focusing on security and the transaction flow is about to change soon anyway, I'm comfortable with the caveat that you brought up.

Fees are distributed to the miner at the same time, but using an independent state transition. This is because transaction fees are pooled per layer, more on which below.

## Mempool

Miners receive incoming, unprocessed transactions via the [gossip network](../p2p/01-overview.md) and locally over GRPC. When a miner receives a transaction, it checks that it's syntactically valid and that it hasn't already seen the transaction before (i.e., those that it's not already in the mempool, or in the mesh as part of at least one block). After that, it saves the transaction into its mempool. Each miner maintains its own mempool.

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Author: CC @almogdepaz on this point, maybe he can help clarify current/expected behavior:

> I don't believe that we actually gossip all transactions.

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Reviewer: e.g. if the counter/nonce is not what you believe it should be, you should not put it in your mempool or propagate it. Also old transactions (that already went into the state) should not be propagated.

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Author: > if the counter/nonce is not what you believe it should be, you should not put it in your mempool or propagate it

This is not a given. It may be that the transaction in question is perfectly valid, but that your node is just missing some context, e.g., you didn't (yet) receive the prior transaction from the same sender.

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Reviewer: Indeed, it is not a given. However, I believe that's the logic that is implemented. @noamnelke knows better than me.

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Author: Yes so there is a broader question here about whether we want to describe the behavior as it stands or as we wish it to be, i.e., aspirationally :)

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Reviewer 3: we validate the origin address and the nounce before we broadcast the tx's

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Reviewer 3: > CC @almogdepaz on this point, maybe he can help clarify current/expected behavior:
> 
> > I don't believe that we actually gossip all transactions.

we validate the origin address and the nounce before we broadcast the tx's

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network.

Reviewer 2: What @barakshani and @almogdepaz say is correct.

As I explained in prev comment - we're currently very strict and only propagate/store transactions that we know of a set of transactions that would allow us to apply them right now.

## Fees and mining rewards

As in Bitcoin and other blockchain platforms, a Spacemesh transaction pays a fee to incentivize a miner to include the transaction in a block. However, fees and mining rewards work a bit differently in Spacemesh.

### Mining rewards

> Time in Spacemesh is divided into fixed-length units of time called [layers and epochs](../README.md#spacemesh-basics). An epoch consists of a fixed number of layers. Each layer is five minutes long.

Author: That's good to know. But I still think it's helpful, and not entirely inaccurate, to think of a layer as being five minutes long. Let me know if you disagree. Also, if you think the wording here should be changed: https://github.com/spacemeshos/protocol#spacemesh-basics.

> Time in Spacemesh is divided into fixed-length units of time called [layers and epochs](../README.md#spacemesh-basics). An epoch consists of a fixed number of layers. Each layer is five minutes long.

Reviewer: Talking about it informally is fine by me. Actually I would mention the formal definition on the spacemesh-basics.

### Address format and signature scheme

Spacemesh uses the standard `curve25519` to generate keypairs. A private key is a random 32 byte number, and the public key is generated from the private key. The Spacemesh address is the 20-byte suffix of the public key. In other words, the wallet address may be expressed as:

`address = Bytes[12..31](public_key)`

## Transaction structure

The actual transaction data structure in Spacemesh contains the following:

- Recipient's address (20 bytes)
- Amount to transfer (8 bytes)
- Amount of the fee to be paid (to the miner) (8 bytes)
- Transaction counter (8 bytes)
- Signature (32 bytes)

The transaction is signed using the private key corresponding to the sender's account. Note that the sender's address is not _explicitly_ included in the transaction. This is because it can be _derived_ from this signature (using [public key extraction](https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/18105/how-does-recovering-the-public-key-from-an-ecdsa-signature-work/18106) applied to the EdDSA signature scheme).

The total size of a transaction is 76 bytes.

### Syntactic validity

> Technically, any message that is 76 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't _contextually valid,_ and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technically, any message that is 108 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't necessarily _contextually valid,_ and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).
```

Updating the number of bytes with the correct sig length and adding the word "necessarily" to make the sentence make sense.

Author: Updated manually

The total size of a transaction is 108 bytes.

### Syntactic validity

Technically, any message that is 108 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction won't necessarily, ultimately be applied to the global state unless [certain conditions](#contextual-validity) are met later.

## Mining transactions

### Mempool and gossip

Miners receive incoming, unprocessed transactions via the [gossip network](../p2p/01-overview.md) and locally over GRPC. When a miner receives a transaction, it checks that the transaction is valid and that it hasn't already seen the transaction before (i.e., it's not already in the mempool, nor in the mesh as part of at least one block).

The node next performs the following basic checks on the transaction:

- Is it syntactically valid? (i.e., the right length)

> - Does the sender account exist, and contain a nonzero balance?

Reviewer 2: We don't verify that the account has a non-zero balance, we verify that it has enough balance to cover the cost of the transaction + fee.

On a related note - we use a projection of the account based on the current state with all outgoing transactions applied. So if Alice sends 3 transactions in a row, they would be accepted to the mempool if they have consecutive counters that start at the current account counter and don't "overdraft" the account.

Incoming transactions are not used in the projection, so here too, we are strict. So if you had 100 coins and we have a transaction from your account that spends 70 and another that credits your account with 50, we won't accept another transaction from you that spends more than 30, until the incoming transaction is applied to global state.

Author: Makes sense. Updated the description based on this!

## Account model

An account in Spacemesh is a mapping from a wallet address to a balance of Smesh tokens. Note that there is not a one-to-one mapping between _users_ and _addresses,_ as one user may control many addresses (or, less often but also possibly, one address could be controlled by many users).

Even though a transaction is signed, so that the protocol can verify that it came from the sender, without additional protections, transactions are still susceptible to a [replay attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replay_attack): if Alice sends funds to Bob, Bob could resend the same transaction (that Alice already signed) to the network to steal additional funds from Alice. In order to prevent replay attacks, each account also stores a transaction counter, also known as a "nonce." Each transaction must declare a nonce, and a transaction is only valid if it has a nonce that matches the current value of the account counter.

### Address format and signature scheme

> Spacemesh uses the standard ED25519 curve to generate keypairs. A private key is 32 bytes of random data. The public key is derived from the private key using ECDSA derivation. The Spacemesh address is the 20-byte prefix of the hash of the public key. In other words, the wallet address may be expressed as:

Author: Is "ECDSA derivation" the right term for this? Is there something more specific? Is there somewhere I can link with more info on this? I couldn't find much.

Reviewer: `ED25519` is not a curve but a signature scheme. the curve is called `curve25519`.
"public key extraction" is a better terminology. Don't think we have anything written on it (but probably other projects do; though most likely not for ed25519), only the code.

Author: @barakshani would you mind glancing at these two links and seeing if the concept is the same? Thanks.

- https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/18105/how-does-recovering-the-public-key-from-an-ecdsa-signature-work/18106
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12480776/how-do-i-obtain-the-public-key-from-an-ecdsa-private-key-in-openssl

Reviewer: only the crypto.stackexchange is relevant .

These 2 seems relevant as well:
https://medium.com/@piyopiyo/how-to-get-senders-ethereum-address-and-public-key-from-signed-transaction-44abe17a1791
https://ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/53078/extracting-public-key-from-signed-ethereum-message-or-transaction-in-javascript

Author: > However, with the signature and the message that was signed, and the knowledge of the curve, it is possible to generate two public keys; one of which will be the public key corresponding to the private key used.

How do we know which public key is the right one?

Reviewer: I misread and mislead you. Thought you are talking about how to _derive_ the sender's public key from a given transaction and its signature (so the sender does not need to send his address, and the message is smaller). This is what all the links above are about.

In fact, you were just talking about how to _generate_ a public key given a private key. In general, it is not a very interesting question, it is standard and has nothing to do with what specific curve we choose to work with. You can just write that the "public key is derived from the private key".
Anyway, this thread is indeed about this issue:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12480776/how-do-i-obtain-the-public-key-from-an-ecdsa-private-key-in-openssl

For your question, I'm guessing that you just check which of the two keys (=address) exists, though it is possible that both keys are valid (the difference between the two is not something that affects the system) -- I need to see the actual scheme to know how it works.

Reviewer: To clarify: we don't have this issue with the two keys, because we use a different signature scheme (ed25519) to ECDSA

Author: > I misread and mislead you. Thought you are talking about how to derive the sender's public key from a given transaction and its signature (so the sender does not need to send his address, and the message is smaller)

Actually, that's exactly what I _was_ talking about! If it's still unclear from the way this is written, let me know, and I can try to reword :)

> I need to see the actual scheme to know how it works.

Not sure how this is implemented in our codebase today, but here's some helpful references. Looks like this is supported in nacl.

- https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/42437/how-to-generate-ed25519-public-key-from-private-key-using-libsodium
- https://github.com/sodium-friends/sodium-native#crypto_sign_ed25519_sk_to_pkpk-sk

> To clarify: we don't have this issue with the two keys, because we use a different signature scheme (ed25519) to ECDSA

Thanks, makes sense.

Reviewer: wait wait, let's try to clarify first.
public key cryptography 101: I generate a private key (say choosing an element uniformly at random) then I derive the public key using the private key.
Example: in discrete log based systems (written multiplicatively), I choose a private key `x`, and compute the public key `g^x` (for an element `g`, specified by the system).

What can I do with it? wonderful things, but that's for next lecture, e.g. sign digital signatures, encrypt message, share a key.

So is this (private to public) what you wanted to know?

Author: Rereading this now, I think we went on a wild goose chase here, sorry about that. I think I may have gotten confused myself between private key -> public key and signature -> public key. My question here was about the latter, and it probably belongs below, on [line 30](https://github.com/spacemeshos/protocol/pull/24/files/c4937312b8b0b0097fbeac20845c70b5ae99f633#diff-cb41cc32cab6bc48066ab33648eb6ccaR30).

I'll clean up the language. Thanks for your help.

> `address = Bytes[0..159](HASH(ECDSAPUBKEY(privkey)))`

Author: Is this correct?

Reviewer 2: No. It's either `Bits[0..159]` or `Bytes[0..19]`.

Also, it's currently just the 20-byte prefix of the public key (not the hash thereof).

Author: Why aren't we using the hash here? Any idea?

Reviewer: @noamnelke are you sure it is the prefix and not suffix?

Reviewer 2: No, you're right, it's the suffix. Thanks for the catch!

Author: Thanks for catching this. Still curious, though - why not use the hash here?

Reviewer: what's the reason for using it?

Author: Ethereum does it, but there doesn't seem to be a good reason--apparently it's a "design choice" and probably has more to do with aesthetics (e.g., contract address and externally-owned account address being the same length/format): https://ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/57151/why-are-ethereum-addresses-hashes-of-public-keys.

## Transaction structure

The actual transaction data structure in Spacemesh contains the following:

- Recipient's address (32 bytes)
- Amount to transfer (8 bytes)
- Amount of the fee to be paid (to the miner) (8 bytes)
- Nonce (8 bytes)
- Signature (32 bytes)

The transaction is signed using the private key corresponding to the sender's account. Note that the sender's address is not _explicitly_ included in the transaction. This is because it can be _implicitly derived_ from this signature using ECDSA derivation.

The total size of a transaction is 88 bytes.

### Syntactic validity

> Technically, any message that is 88 bytes long can be interpreted as a syntactically valid transaction. However, the transaction isn't _contextually valid_, and thus won't be applied to the global state, unless certain conditions are met (see next section).

Author: Is it okay to refer to a transaction as _contextually valid_ like this?

### Transaction ordering

Transaction order in Spacemesh is defined in the following way:

1. Blocks in layer _n_ come before those in layer _n+1_
1. The IDs of all [contextually valid](../consensus/01-overview.md#validity) blocks in layer _n_ are listed in ascending order
1. These block IDs are concatenated and hashed
1. The hash sum is used as the seed for a [Mersenne Twister](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mersenne_Twister) (a type of pseudorandom number generator)
1. A [Fisher-Yates shuffle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher%E2%80%93Yates_shuffle) is performed on the list of block IDs using the output of the Mersenne Twister
1. Transactions from the ordered blocks are then applied, in the order they appear in each block, ignoring duplicates (only the first appearance of a transaction determines its ordering)

### Contextual validity

A transaction is deemed contextually valid, and is applied to the global state, if the following conditions apply:

1. The origin account (derived from the signature) exists
1. The nonce on the account matches the transaction nonce
1. The account balance is greater than or equal to the transaction amount fee

### Global state

> When a transaction is applied to the global state, it is passed through the following state transition function:

Author: Per @avive question from gdoc:

> when are they evaluated? when is the STF applied - between all layers, between all layers that passed hare, etc... need to clarify this...

Author: Thanks @noamnelke. For the purposes of this doc I think it's okay to say they're applied for each layer as that layer is finalized, maybe without defining "finalized" (we could include a link to the Consensus doc).

> 1. The origin account balance is decremented by the transaction amount + fee

Author: What about the fee paid to the miner account? Does that happen as part of the STF as well?

Author: Thanks. I added a sentence on this, but it still sounds really vague:

> Fees are distributed to the miner at the same time, but using a different mechanism.

Can we flesh this out any further? What "separate mechanism" is this?

Reviewer 2: There are currently two state transitions. First rewards are distributed to miners for the layer's blocks and then transactions are applied.

I'm so glad I had to explain this to you now: I was going to explain why it happens in that order and was about to say that while transactions could spend a reward, the rewards are independent of transactions, but that didn't make sense because of fees, so I looked at the code and found this horrible, terrible bug that I can blame no-one but myself for: https://github.com/spacemeshos/go-spacemesh/issues/1798

> 1. The origin account balance is decremented by the transaction amount + fee

Author: Is this process atomic? Could it possibly fail partway through?

Author: per what? per layer? per block? per something else?

Reviewer 2: Per layer

1. The recipient account balance is incremented by the transaction amount
1. The origin account nonce is incremented by one

> After each pass over the list of transactions, another pass is performed on the remaining (unapplied) transactions, in the same order, until no transaction from the list can be applied.

Author: Does this means that the worst case performance is O(N^2) in the number of transactions? I.e., if we had a list of N transactions, where each one depended on the one after it in the list? Is the average/expected case O(N)?

1. Transactions from the ordered blocks are then applied, in the order they appear in each block, ignoring duplicates (only the first appearance of a transaction determines its ordering)

### Contextual validity

A transaction is deemed contextually valid, and is applied to the global state, if the following conditions apply:

1. The origin account (derived from the signature) exists
1. The nonce on the account matches the transaction nonce
1. The account balance is greater than or equal to the transaction amount fee

### Global state

When a transaction is applied to the global state, it is passed through the following state transition function:

1. The origin account balance is decremented by the transaction amount + fee
1. The recipient account balance is incremented by the transaction amount
1. The origin account nonce is incremented by one

After each pass over the list of transactions, another pass is performed on the remaining (unapplied) transactions, in the same order, until no transaction from the list can be applied.

## Mempool

> Miners receive incoming, unprocessed transactions via the [gossip network](../p2p/01-overview.md) and locally over GRPC. When a miner receives a transaction, it checks that it's syntactically valid and that it hasn't already seen the transaction before (i.e., those that it's not already in the mempool, or in the mesh as part of at least one block). After that, it saves the transaction into its mempool. Each miner maintains its own mempool.

Author: Does a miner also check the _contextual_ validity of a tx, i.e., that the sender account exists, has a balance, that the nonce matches, etc., before adding it to the mempool? It shouldn't, should it?

Author: Okay. Thanks. I'll leave this out of the doc, then.

> Miners are expected to include transactions in blocks that are predicted to be valid when they get applied to the global state, with a high likelihood.

Author: What does "high likelihood" mean here? Can we tighten this language? How does it "predict"?

Author: > Miners are expected to include transactions in blocks that are predicted to be valid when they get applied to the global state, with a high likelihood.

Okay. I'm going to leave this sentence out as well since I think it leads to more questions than answers.

For my own edification, does "predicted to be valid" apply to the _blocks_ or to the _transactions_ though?

Reviewer 2: To the transactions. Valid blocks may include contextually invalid transactions.

> Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network, regardless of contextual validity.

Author: Is this accurate?

## Mempool

Miners receive incoming, unprocessed transactions via the [gossip network](../p2p/01-overview.md) and locally over GRPC. When a miner receives a transaction, it checks that it's syntactically valid and that it hasn't already seen the transaction before (i.e., those that it's not already in the mempool, or in the mesh as part of at least one block). After that, it saves the transaction into its mempool. Each miner maintains its own mempool.

Miners are expected to include transactions in blocks that are predicted to be valid when they get applied to the global state, with a high likelihood.

Gossip network participants are expected to gossip _all syntactically valid_ transactions to the network, regardless of contextual validity.

## Fees and mining rewards

As in Bitcoin and other blockchain platforms, Spacemesh transactions pay fees to miners to incentivize them to include the transaction in a block. However, fees and mining rewards work a bit differently in Spacemesh.

### Mining rewards

Time in Spacemesh is divided into fixed-length units of time called [layers and epochs](../intro.md#spacemesh-basics). An epoch consists of a fixed number of layers.

> Every five minutes, the Spacemesh protocol distributes 50 Smesh (SMH) to all miners who contributed at least one block to the mesh over the prior five minute period. The amount of the reward paid to each miner depends on the number of miners who contributed blocks, and the number of blocks contributed. A miner that contributes more blocks receives more reward.

Author: @avive I paraphrased a lot of this section from https://github.com/spacemeshos/testnet-guide/blob/master/rewards.md.

Do we want to use a specific number here? I think specific numbers are helpful as they give the reader a concrete anchor, but I know the testnet parameters may not be fixed yet.

Personally I find it confusing to talk about giving rewards to _miners;_ the math makes a lot more sense to me if we talk about rewards going to _blocks._

Reviewer 2: 1. I agree about rewards going to blocks.
2. If you use a specific number you have to say something like "currently 50 SMH, subject to the spacemesh minting schedule"
3. See 👇 

----
Your description here is actually not correct.

Currently, the block subsidy and fees are divided equally between all blocks in a layer. But this is subject to change when we implement weights. Then it becomes way more complicated. Each miner gets a share based on the multiplication of storage and ticks they declared in their activation transaction. This share is divided by the number of blocks they are expected to produce during the entire epoch - let's call it their block share. Each block they end up _actually_ producing will grant them the relative part of the layer reward based on their relative part of the sum of all block shares in that layer.

Author: Thanks. What happens to the forfeit portion of the share? Does it get burned? Does it get distributed to the other miners/blocks? How?

Reviewer 2: I'll clarify this sentence:
>block subsidy and fees are divided equally between all blocks in a layer.

I should have said "all *published, contextually valid* blocks in a layer". So yeah, distributed to the other miners, equally. We can't know how many miners were eligible for blocks, so we actually just divide the layer's total reward between all published, valid blocks.

Author: Thanks. Just to check my understanding, if I'm eligible to produce, say, 10 blocks, and I only produce 5, then actually I'd receive _slightly more_ than half of the fees+subsidy I was eligible to receive. I'd receive the first half for the blocks I actually published. The rest of the fees/subsidy would be split up among _all the published blocks in the layer_, including my own, so I'd get slightly more than half, right?

Author: Ping @noamnelke on previous question - thanks!

Reviewer 2: Sorry for not responding earlier, this was buried under a mountain of emails I needed to look at!

Yes, but only if you happen to have more than one block in the same layer and you create some, but not all the blocks you're eligible for in that layer.

This makes little sense, though. If you're already online and producing blocks, why not publish everything you're eligible for? I mean, you may skip blocks if you're offline, or even chose to be offline some of the time and it's rational, but holding back on blocks while online is irrational.

We also want to introduce a mechanism where if you're eligible for more than one block in the same layer, you'd be able to produce a single consolidated block with a list of eligibility proofs and get the same reward as if you published a separate block for each eligibility. This would be more efficient for the miner, but also much more efficient for the network (since the block's votes won't have to be repeated).

Author: Very cool. Thanks. This was a bit of a silly, pedantic question - just testing my own understanding.

### Rewards adjustment

> As an incentive to miners to submit blocks with many transactions, the reward for a block with less than 15 transactions is reduced by 10%. This amount is distributed as a bonus evenly to all miners who submitted at least 15 transactions in a block.

Author: What's the motivation behind this logic?

> This amount is distributed as a bonus evenly to all miners who submitted at least 15 transactions in a block.

@avive Again, this should be about _blocks_ not _miners_ right? I.e., the penalty applies to a _block_ that contains less than 15 txs?

Reviewer 2: This feature was removed, there's no penalty and no threshold anymore. You should just delete this section.

### Transaction fees

> Like the wait staff in a restaurant pooling tips, transaction fees in Spacemesh are also pooled, per layer, and evenly distributed to all miners who submitted at least one block in the layer.

Author: @avive Shouldn't miners who submitted more blocks receive more fees? (I.e., again, shouldn't this be about blocks not miners)?

Reviewer 2: They do, the reward is per block, not per miner.

Author: Pooled per _layer_ or per _epoch_?

Reviewer 2: Currently per layer, however the idea to pool it per epoch has been discussed and not ruled out.
